[Spark][Sharing] Add doc for delta sharing (#2546)
delta-io/delta: docs/source/delta-sharing.md

 
---
description: Learn how to perform reads on Delta Sharing tables.
---

# Read Delta Sharing Tables

> Delta Sharing supports most of the options provided by <AS> DataFrame read for performing batch/streaming/cdf reads on tables.

Reviewer: Given this is a first time we are adding this connector, it is good to add one or two sentences to introduce Sharing and point for further links.

> Delta Sharing supports most of the options provided by <AS> DataFrame read for performing batch/streaming/cdf reads on tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delta Sharing source supports most of the options provided by <AS> DataFrame for performing reads through batch, streaming, or table changes (CDF) APIs on shared <Delta> tables.
```

> Delta Sharing doesn't support writing to a shared table. Please refer to the [delta sharing repo](https://github.com/delta-io/delta-sharing/blob/main/README.md) for more details. 

Reviewer: nit: capitalize the first letter in `delta` here and elsewhere in the doc.

> For Delta Sharing reads on shared tables with advanced delta features such as DeletionVectors and ColumnMapping, 

Reviewer: May be make a table and list down what are the read table features that are supported and the version?

| Read Table Feature | Available since <Delta> version|
| Deletion Vectors (link to the DV page) | 3.1.0|

Author: added

you enable integration with <AS> DataSourceV2 and Catalog APIs (since 3.1) by setting the same configurations as delta when you create a new `SparkSession`. See [_](delta-batch.md#sql-support).

.. contents:: In this article:
  :local:
  :depth: 2

## Read a snapshot

> After you save the profile file and launch Spark with the connector library, you can access shared tables.

Reviewer: what is a profile file?

  # of a table (`<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>`).
  table_path = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"
  df = spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(table_path)
  ```
  ```scala
  // A table path is the profile file path following with `#` and the fully qualified name 
  // of a table (`<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>`).
  val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"
  val df = spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath)
  ```
  ```java
  // A table path is the profile file path following with `#` and the fully qualified name 
  // of a table (`<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>`).
  String tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>";
  Dataset<Row> df = spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath);
  ```

The DataFrame returned automatically reads the most recent snapshot of the table for any query; 

Delta Sharing supports predicates pushdown to allow fetching only needed data from the Delta Sharing server when there are applicable predicates in the query.

## Query an older snapshot of a shared table (time travel)

> Once the provider enables history sharing of the shared table, Delta Sharing time travel allows you to query an older snapshot of a shared table.

Reviewer: what is a provider?

Author: added description at the top.

.. code-language-tabs::

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM mytable TIMESTAMP AS OF timestamp_expression
  SELECT * FROM mytable VERSION AS OF version
  ```
  ```python
  spark.read.format("delta").option("timestampAsOf", timestamp_string).load(tablePath)

  spark.read.format("delta").option("versionAsOf", version).load(tablePath)
  ```
  ```scala
  spark.read.format("delta").option("timestampAsOf", timestamp_string).load(tablePath)

  spark.read.format("delta").option("versionAsOf", version).load(tablePath)
  ```

The `timestamp_expression` and `version` share the same syntax as [delta](delta-batch.md#timestamp-and-version-syntax).

> ## Read CDF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Read Table Changes (CDF)
```

Author: updated.

    .option("endingTimestamp", '2021-05-21 12:00:00') \
    .load(tablePath)
  
  # providing only the startingVersion/timestamp
  spark.read.format("deltaSharing") \
    .option("readChangeFeed", "true") \
    .option("startingVersion", 0) \
    .load(tablePath)
  ```

  ```scala
  val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"

  // version as ints or longs
  spark.read.format("deltaSharing")
    .option("readChangeFeed", "true")
    .option("startingVersion", 0)
    .option("endingVersion", 10)
    .load(tablePath)

  // timestamps as formatted timestamp
  spark.read.format("deltaSharing")
    .option("readChangeFeed", "true")
    .option("startingTimestamp", "2024-01-18 05:45:46")
    .option("endingTimestamp", "2024-01-18 12:00:00")
    .load(tablePath)
  
  // providing only the startingVersion/timestamp
  spark.read.format("deltaSharing")
    .option("readChangeFeed", "true")
    .option("startingVersion", 0)
    .load(tablePath)
  ```

## Streaming

Delta Sharing Streaming is deeply integrated with [Spark Structured Streaming](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/structured-streaming-programming-guide.html) through `readStream`, 

> and able to connect with any sink that is able to perform `writeStream`.

Reviewer: nit: remove the new line.

Author: I intended to make them separate as it's a new topic.

Please do remember to set the spark configurations mentioned in [_](delta-batch.md#sql-support) in order to read shared tables with DeletionVectors and ColumnMapping. 

Batch queries can be performed as is, because it can automatically resolve the responseFormat based on the table features of the shared table.
An additional option `responseFormat=delta` needs to be set for cdf and streaming queries when reading shared tables with DeletionVectors or ColumnMapping enabled.

```scala
import org.apache.spark.sql.SparkSession

val spark = SparkSession
        .builder()
        .appName("...")
        .master("...")
        .config("spark.sql.extensions", "io.delta.sql.DeltaSparkSessionExtension")
        .config("spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog", "org.apache.spark.sql.delta.catalog.DeltaCatalog")
        .getOrCreate()

val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"

// Batch query
spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath)

// CDF query
spark.read.format("deltaSharing")
  .option("readChangeFeed", "true")
  .option("responseFormat", "delta")
  .option("startingVersion", 1)
  .load(tablePath)

// Streaming query

> spark.readStream.format("deltaSharing").option("responseFormat", "delta").load(tablePath)

Reviewer: this seems like we are repeating the same thing. Is it possible to update the above sections with additional details on what config to enable to read tables with `responseFormat=delta`?

Author: considering this is newly introduced to solve a new problem, I feel it's more clear to keep it separate.

 
---
description: Learn how to perform reads on Delta Sharing tables.
---

# Read Delta Sharing Tables

> [Delta Sharing](https://delta.io/sharing/) is an open protocol for secure real-time exchange of large datasets, which enables 

Reviewer 2: This gives information on how to read the tables in the share, but how about how the recipients can discover what shares, schemas, and tables are available? How can they tell whether those tables support certain features? Do they have to use a separate tool / library to get this information?

Author: good point. 
Those are available through the REST API in the protocol, but not exposed through scala APIs.

We'll have to add new wrapper for that.

Reviewer 2: We should mention or reference discovery methods somewhere in the docs.

Author: added.

```
Please follow the [quick start](https://github.com/delta-io/delta-sharing?tab=readme-ov-file#quick-start) to leverage the delta sharing python connector to discover the shared tables.
```

| [Column Mapping](delta-column-mapping.md) | 3.1.0 |

Batch queries can be performed as is, because it can automatically resolve the `responseFormat` based on the table features of the shared table.
An additional option `responseFormat=delta` needs to be set for cdf and streaming queries when reading shared tables with Deletion Vectors or Column Mapping enabled.

```scala
import org.apache.spark.sql.SparkSession

val spark = SparkSession
        .builder()
        .appName("...")
        .master("...")
        .config("spark.sql.extensions", "io.delta.sql.DeltaSparkSessionExtension")
        .config("spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog", "org.apache.spark.sql.delta.catalog.DeltaCatalog")
        .getOrCreate()

val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"

// Batch query
spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath)

// CDF query
spark.read.format("deltaSharing")
  .option("readChangeFeed", "true")
  .option("responseFormat", "delta")
  .option("startingVersion", 1)
  .load(tablePath)

// Streaming query
spark.readStream.format("deltaSharing").option("responseFormat", "delta").load(tablePath)
```

> .. include:: /shared/replacements.md

Reviewer 2: Do we need a troubleshooting section?

Author: There is a limitations section in some pages, while I don't have anything on top of mind.

https://docs.delta.io/latest/delta-uniform.html#limitations

 
---
description: Learn how to perform reads on Delta Sharing tables.
---

# Read Delta Sharing Tables

[Delta Sharing](https://delta.io/sharing/) is an open protocol for secure real-time exchange of large datasets, which enables 
organizations to share data in real time regardless of which computing platforms they use. 

> It is a simple REST protocol that securely shares access to part of a cloud dataset and leverages 

Reviewer 3: nit: shares access -> grants access

> modern cloud storage systems, such as S3, ADLS, or GCS, to reliably transfer data.

Reviewer 3: Should we add R2 to the list?

> In Delta Sharing, data provider is the one who owns the original dataset or table, and share it with a broad range of consumers. 

Reviewer 3: nit: share it -> shares it

> Each table can be configured to share with different options(history, filtering, etc.) We focus on consuming the shared table in this doc.

Reviewer 3: nit: to share -> to be shared

  CREATE TABLE mytable USING deltaSharing LOCATION '<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>';
  SELECT * FROM mytable;
  ```
  ```python
  # A table path is the profile file path following with `#` and the fully qualified name 
  # of a table (`<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>`).
  table_path = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"
  df = spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(table_path)
  ```
  ```scala
  // A table path is the profile file path following with `#` and the fully qualified name 
  // of a table (`<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>`).
  val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"
  val df = spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath)
  ```
  ```java
  // A table path is the profile file path following with `#` and the fully qualified name 
  // of a table (`<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>`).
  String tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>";
  Dataset<Row> df = spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath);
  ```

The DataFrame returned automatically reads the most recent snapshot of the table for any query; 

> Delta Sharing supports predicates pushdown to allow fetching only needed data from the Delta Sharing server when there are applicable predicates in the query.

Reviewer 3: nit: predicates pushdown -> predicate pushdown

## Query an older snapshot of a shared table (time travel)

Once the data provider enables history sharing of the shared table, Delta Sharing time travel allows you to query an older snapshot of a shared table.

.. code-language-tabs::

  ```sql
  SELECT * FROM mytable TIMESTAMP AS OF timestamp_expression
  SELECT * FROM mytable VERSION AS OF version
  ```
  ```python
  spark.read.format("deltaSharing").option("timestampAsOf", timestamp_string).load(tablePath)

  spark.read.format("deltaSharing").option("versionAsOf", version).load(tablePath)
  ```
  ```scala
  spark.read.format("deltaSharing").option("timestampAsOf", timestamp_string).load(tablePath)

  spark.read.format("deltaSharing").option("versionAsOf", version).load(tablePath)
  ```

The `timestamp_expression` and `version` share the same syntax as [<Delta>](delta-batch.md#timestamp-and-version-syntax).

## Read Table Changes (CDF)

Once the data provider turns on CDF on the original <Delta> table and shares it with history through Delta Sharing, the recipient can query CDF of a Delta Sharing table similar to CDF of a <Delta> table.

> TODO: check timestamp format.

Reviewer 3: Does this need to be updated?

and able to connect with any sink that is able to perform `writeStream`.

Once the data provider shares a table with history, the recipient can perform a streaming query on the table.
When you load a Delta Sharing table as a stream source and use it in a streaming query, the query processes all of the data present in the shared table as well as any new data that arrives after the stream is started.

```scala
val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"

spark.readStream.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath)
```

Delta Sharing Streaming supports the following functionalities in the same way as Delta Streaming: [Limit input rate](delta-streaming.md#limit-input-rate), 
[Ignore updates and deletes](delta-streaming.md#ignore-updates-and-deletes), [Specify initial position](delta-streaming.md#specify-initial-position)

In addition, `maxVersionsPerRpc` is provided to decide how many versions of files are requested from the server in every Delta Sharing rpc. This is to help
reduce the per rpc workload and make the Delta Sharing streaming job more stable. 

> Especially when the streaming resumes from a checkpoint and a lots of new versions are accumulated on the shared table on the server. The default is 100.

Reviewer 3: Consider joining this sentence to the previous one (+ a few nits):

... make the Delta sharing streaming job more stable, especially when lots of new versions have accumulated....

> Especially when the streaming resumes from a checkpoint and a lots of new versions are accumulated on the shared table on the server. The default is 100.

Author: updated.

> .. note:: Trigger.AvailableNow is not supported in Delta Sharing Streaming.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention the workaround?

## Read Advanced <Delta> Features in Delta Sharing
In order to support advanced <Delta> features in Delta Sharing, "Delta Format Sharing" is introduced since delta-sharing-client 1.0 and delta-sharing-spark 3.1, 

> in which the actions of a shared table is returned in <Delta> format, then a <Delta> library is leveraged to read data.

Reviewer 3: nit: is returned -> are returned.

> in which the actions of a shared table is returned in <Delta> format, then a <Delta> library is leveraged to read data.

Reviewer 2: then a Delta library is leveraged to read data -> allowing a Delta library to read it

> Please do remember to set the spark configurations mentioned in [_](delta-batch.md#sql-support) in order to read shared tables with DeletionVectors and ColumnMapping. 

Reviewer 2: Please do remember -> Please remember

Author: updated.

> Please do remember to set the spark configurations mentioned in [_](delta-batch.md#sql-support) in order to read shared tables with DeletionVectors and ColumnMapping. 

Reviewer 2: DV, CM with space

| Read Table Feature | Available since version |
| - | - |
| Deletion Vectors(#delta-deletion-vectors.md) | 3.1.0 | 

> | ColumnMapping(#delta-column-mapping.md) | 3.1.0 |

Reviewer 2: Space?

Author: added

> Batch queries can be performed as is, because it can automatically resolve the responseFormat based on the table features of the shared table.

Reviewer 2: highlight responseFormat?

Author: updated.

> An additional option `responseFormat=delta` needs to be set for cdf and streaming queries when reading shared tables with DeletionVectors or ColumnMapping enabled.

Reviewer 2: DV, CM

Author: updated to Deletion Vectors and Column Mapping, it doesn't seem like delta is using any abbreviation.

```scala
import org.apache.spark.sql.SparkSession

val spark = SparkSession
        .builder()
        .appName("...")
        .master("...")
        .config("spark.sql.extensions", "io.delta.sql.DeltaSparkSessionExtension")
        .config("spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog", "org.apache.spark.sql.delta.catalog.DeltaCatalog")
        .getOrCreate()

val tablePath = "<profile-file-path>#<share-name>.<schema-name>.<table-name>"

// Batch query
spark.read.format("deltaSharing").load(tablePath)

// CDF query
spark.read.format("deltaSharing")
  .option("readChangeFeed", "true")
  .option("responseFormat", "delta")
  .option("startingVersion", 1)
  .load(tablePath)

// Streaming query
spark.readStream.format("deltaSharing").option("responseFormat", "delta").load(tablePath)
```

<a id="profile-file"></a>

> ## Profile File

Reviewer 2: Why not reference the profile file in the protocol directly? Why a duplicate section?

Author: removed the section.
